# Course of disease:

The coronavirus pandemic has completely changed our way of life, shut
down entire countries and shuttered businesses across the globe. After
an initial outbreak of disease in Wuhan, China, which began in December
2019, the novel virus has spread to over 180 countries, with the US and
the European nations of Spain, Italy and France the worst hit.
Researchers linked the pathogen to a family of viruses known as
coronaviruses in January. That family contains viruses responsible for
previous outbreaks of the respiratory diseases SARS and MERS, as well as
some cases of the common cold.

## Signs and symptoms of disease, How infectious is coronavirus?
The new coronavirus causes symptoms much like the
ones of previously identified disease-causing coronaviruses. In
currently identified patients, there seems to be a spectrum of illness:
A large number experience mild pneumonia-like symptoms, while others
have a much more severe response.

According to WHO COVID-19 affects different people in different ways.
Most infected people will develop mild to moderate illness and recover
without hospitalization.

Most common symptoms:

-   Fever, elevated body temperature

-   Dry cough

-   Fatigue or muscle pain

-   Breathing difficulties

Less common symptoms include these:

-   Coughing up mucus or blood

-   Headaches

-   Fatigue or muscle pain

-   Diarrhoea

-   Kidney failure

-   Loss of taste or smell

Serious symptoms:

-   Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath.

-   Chest pain or pressure.

-   Loss of speech or movement.

> As the disease progresses, patients also develop pneumonia, which
> inflames the lungs and causes them to fill with fluid. This can be
> detected by an X-ray. On average it takes 5--6 days from when someone
> is infected with the virus for symptoms to show, however it can take
> up to 14 days. 

**r nought value (R0 value), Pathogenesis,**

The \"r nought\" (R0) value of the coronavirus is an indicator of how
successfully it spreads from person to person. This metric helps
determine the basic reproduction number of an infectious disease. In the
simplest terms, the value relates to how many people can be infected by
one person carrying the disease. Experts use it to predict how far and
how fast a disease will spread, and the number can also inform policy
decisions about how to contain an outbreak.

Infectious diseases such as measles have an R0 of 12 to 18, which is
remarkably high. The SARS epidemic of 2002-2003 had an R0 of around 3. A
handful of studies modelling the COVID-19 outbreak have given a similar
value with a range between 1.4 and 3.8. However, there is plenty of
variation between studies and models attempting to predict the R0 of
novel coronavirus due to the constantly changing number of cases. It
seems to have settled on a figure around 2.2, meaning every infected
person infects 2 others.

Three possibilities exist for the potential transmission or decline of a
disease, depending on its R~0~ value:

-   If R~0~ is less than 1, each existing infection causes less than one
    new infection. In this case, the disease will decline and eventually
    die out.

-   If R~0 ~equals 1, each existing infection causes one new infection.
    The disease will stay alive and stable, but there won't be an
    outbreak or an epidemic.

-   If R~0 ~is more than 1, each existing infection causes more than one
    new infection. The disease will be transmitted between people, and
    there may be an outbreak or epidemic.

Importantly, a disease's R~0~ value only applies when everyone in a
population is completely vulnerable to the disease. This means:

-   no one has been vaccinated

-   no one has had the disease before

-   there's no way to control the spread of the disease

**Diagnosis of the disease,**

The three unprecedented outbreaks of emerging human coronavirus (HCoV)
infections at the beginning of the twenty-first century have highlighted
the necessity for readily available, accurate and fast diagnostic
testing methods. The laboratory diagnostic methods for human coronavirus
infections have evolved substantially, with the development of novel
assays as well as the availability of updated tests for emerging ones.
Newer laboratory methods are fast, highly sensitive and specific, and
are gradually replacing the conventional gold standards.  Viral
pneumonias typically do not result in the production of purulent sputum.
Thus, **a nasopharyngeal swab** is usually the collection method used to
obtain a specimen for testing. Nasopharyngeal specimens may miss some
infections; a deeper specimen may need to be obtained by bronchoscopy.
Alternatively, repeated testing can be used because over time, the
likelihood of the SARS-CoV-2 being present in the nasopharynx increases.
Several integrated, random-access, point-of-care molecular devices are
currently under development for fast and accurate diagnosis of
SARS-CoV-2 infections. These assays are simple, fast and safe and can be
used in the local hospitals and clinics bearing the burden of
identifying and treating patients.

**Any recommended treatment of the disease, Ibuprofen use and
warnings,**

Coronaviruses are hardy organisms. They\'re effective at hiding from the
human immune system, and we haven\'t developed any reliable treatments
or vaccines to eradicate them. In most cases, health officials attempt
to deal with the symptoms. Notably, because they are viruses,
coronaviruses are not susceptible to antibiotics. Antibiotics are
medicines designed to fight bacteria and don\'t do any damage to the
SARS-CoV-2 virus. There are no specific treatments for COVID-19 as yet,
though a number are in the works including experimental antivirals,
which can attack the virus, and existing drugs targeted at other viruses
like HIV which have shown some promise.

Ibuprofen, an anti-inflammatory drug sold under various names such as
Brufen, Nurofen and Advil, has been linked with adverse outcomes for
patients with COVID-19. There's been some confusion on whether we should
or shouldn't take ibuprofen to treat symptoms of COVID-19 -- especially
after the World Health Organization (WHO) changed its stance. After
initially recommending people avoid taking ibuprofen to treat symptoms
of the new coronavirus disease, as of March 19 the WHO now does not
recommend avoiding ibuprofen to treat COVID-19 symptoms.

The confusion began after France's Minister of Solidarity and
Health [Oliver Véran](https://twitter.com/olivierveran) announced that
taking anti-inflammatory drugs (such as ibuprofen or cortisone) could be
a factor in worsening a COVID-19 infection.

**, Vaccine research,**

Currently, no approved vaccines exist to prevent infection with
SARS-CoV-2. Developing new vaccines takes time and they must be
rigorously tested and confirmed safe via clinical trials before they can
be routinely used in humans. Anthony Fauci, director of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in the US, has frequently
stated that a vaccine is at least a year to 18 months away. Experts
agree there\'s a ways to go yet. However, there is great progress being
made, and a number of vaccine candidates have appeared in the time since
COVID-19 was discovered.

In developing a vaccine that targets SARS-CoV-2, scientists are looking
intensely at the spike proteins. These proteins, which are present on
the surface of the virus, enable it to enter human cells where it can
replicate and make copies of itself.

A Phase 1 clinical trial evaluating an investigational vaccine designed
to protect against coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has begun at
Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute (KPWHRI) in
Seattle. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
(NIAID), part of the National Institutes of Health, is funding the
trial. KPWHRI is part of NIAID's Infectious Diseases Clinical Research
Consortium. The open-label trial has enrolled 45 healthy adult
volunteers' ages 18 to 55 years over approximately 6 weeks. The vaccine
is called mRNA-1273 and was developed by NIAID scientists and their
collaborators at the biotechnology company Moderna, Inc., based in
Cambridge, Massachusetts. The Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness
Innovations (CEPI) supported the manufacturing of the vaccine candidate
for the Phase 1 clinical trial.
